docs/index.md, before:

## The many reasons for switching to Linux

### Don't pay $200 for your operating system.

You're probably saying to yourself: "Oh, I didn't pay for Windows". Are you absolutely sure? If your computer came with a copy of Windows, then you paid for it, even if the store didn't tell you. On average, the price of a Windows license is about a quarter of the price of a new computer. Where do you think Microsoft gets its money from?

Or, if you build your own PC and buy your individual hardware components, you will find that a new Windows 11 key costs about $140 for the Home Edition and $260 for the Pro version on the Microsoft website.

On the other hand, you can get Linux for free. That's right, all these guys all around the world have worked very hard to make a clean, secure, efficient, good-looking system, and they're giving their work away so that everyone can use it for free. Of course, some companies make a good business out of selling support, documentation, hotline, etc. for their own version of Linux, and that is certainly a good thing. But most of the time, you don't have to pay a cent.

### No more crapware

If you've ever bought a new computer running Windows, you must know that it can be a very frustrating experience.

It all starts the first time you turn it on: countless windows pop up asking you to subscribe to services, the premium version of an antivirus, games you never asked for, productivity applications that require you to create an online account, and so on.

But it doesn't stop there. Every time you start your computer, all these pre-installed programs start up in the background, and you have to wait longer and longer to see your desktop on the screen, and when you finally do so, it feels too slow to use because all these programs are running in the background.

To add insult to injury, often after you have owned your new computer for 30 days, new dialogs start popping up and you realize that some of the programs you thought were free (antivirus, for example) really aren't, all you have is a free 30-day trial.

The thing is, most computer manufacturers think this is a good thing. They install programs on your computer before you buy it, because they think it will improve your experience, because it will give you "more" for the same price, and because they think it will help differentiate them from competitors, who may not offer as many "improvements" over the standard system. For them, this is added value.

But for the user, it usually means more pain, more waiting, more uninstalling of unwanted programs, more money to pay if you decide you do need that not-so-free antivirus, and at the end of the day, a bloated and crippled computer. That's why these programs have been given a not-so-polite name: "crapware".

None of that with Linux. No program will nag you to subscribe, pay after a trial period is over, or just slow down your computer and make you wait some more while it boots up, just when you thought it was ready to use. Linux comes with everything that you need to start working right out of the box, but without the crapware.

### Freedom!

Linux and open source software in general is _free_. This means that its license is a _free license_, and the most common one is the _General Public License (GPL)_. This license says that anyone is allowed to copy the software, see the source code (the "recipe"), modify it, and redistribute it as long as it remains licensed under the GPL.

So what do you care about freedom? Imagine that Microsoft disappearing tomorrow (okay, that's not very likely, but what about in 5 years, 10 years?). Or imagine that they suddenly tripled the price of a Windows or Office license. If you're locked into Windows, there's nothing you can do. You (or your business) depend on this one company, on their software, and you can't possibly make things work without it (What good is a computer without an operating system?).

Isn't that a serious problem? You depend on a single company and trust them wholeheartedly to keep something as important as your computers running the way they should in these days. If Microsoft decides to move Windows to a paid subscription model, there's nothing you can do about it (except switch to Linux, of course). If Windows has a bug that really bothers you, and Microsoft won't fix it, there's nothing you can do about it. If a new version of Windows doesn't support your hardware anymore, there's nothing you can do about it.

With open source, when a particular project or sponsoring company dies, all the code remains open to the community and people can continue to improve it. If this project is particulary useful to you, you can even do this yourself. If a particular bug annoys you, you can report it, talk to the developers, but even better, you can fix it yourself (or hire someone to do so), and send the changes back to the upstream developers so that everyone gets the improvement as well. You're free to do (almost) anything you want with the software.

### When the system is installed, why would you _still_ need to install stuff?

Installing Windows is just the beginning. Imagine you have just installed your brand-new copy of Windows 11 and are getting ready to unleash your computer skills. Okay, let's check for new email. Oh, there's no serious email client preinstalled on Windows. You could buy Microsoft Office to get Outlook up and running, or you could install Thunderbird. Either way, you have to go online, find a website where you can download an .exe or .msi installer file, download it, and install it.

Whew, okay, now you're all set. A friend sent you an email with an attached .docx or .odt text document. Your Windows can't read that either, right now. You either have to buy your copy of Microsoft Office, or you just download LibreOffice, but you still have to find it, download it (hopefully you have a broadband connection), install it, etc.

Your friend also sent you an image, but it has a bad contrast, bad brightness, and needs a good crop. So you go out and buy a paid subscription of Photoshop, or download GIMP (that's the name of the free program that can do almost as much as Photoshop): search, download, install, and so on.

That's enough: you get the idea, Windows is far from complete, and installing it is just the beginning of trouble.

Your friend also sent you an image, but it has a bad contrast, bad brightness, and needs a good crop. So you go out and buy a paid subscription of Photoshop, or download GIMP (that's is the name of the free program that can do almost as much as Photoshop): search, download, install, and so on.

That's enough: you get the idea, Windows is far from complete, and installing it is just the beginning of trouble.

When you get Linux (such as Ubuntu, Fedora, etc., these are different "flavors" of Linux), you also get, without installing anything else:

* everything you need to write text documents, edit spreadsheets or make nice presentations
* a web browser (e.g., Firefox) and an email client (e.g., Thunderbird or Evolution)
* an image editor (GIMP) almost as powerful as Photoshop
* a movie player
* a music player and organizer
* a PDF reader
* everything you need to decompress archives (ZIP, etc.)
* etc.

You can just start working right away.

### Forget about drivers.

New pieces of hardware, even the simplest kind, usually comes with a CD or a download link that contains a very small piece of software called a "driver". If you read the instructions manual, you know that the hardware won't work on a Windows computer until you install the driver. If you're like most people and don't read the manual, then you'll probably figure it out on your own when you see that your new high-tech gizmo doesn't work out of the box.

If you bought the hardware a while ago, and you're reusing it on another computer, you'll probably want to get the latest version of the driver from the manufacturer's website. This can take quite a while, considering how, huh, let's say, oddly organized some manufacturers' websites are.

Okay, so that's just one piece of hardware. Now imagine that you want to install Windows on a whole new, untouched, computer. You'll have to wait for Windows Update or the Device Manager to detect your hardware, or actively click on it, or install third-party tools like Intel Driver Assistant or NVIDIA GeForce Experience, find the latest driver for each piece of hardware, install it, and reboot from time to time. And that is on top of an already lengthy Windows installation.

Linux doesn't need separate drivers. All the drivers are already included in the Linux kernel, the core of the system, and come with every single Linux installation. This means a very quick and self-contained installation process. Once you're done with installing Linux, you have everything you need to start working (including the software you'll be using, see "When the system has installed …" article on this website) and ready to use peripherals.

### Update all your software with a single click.

Windows has a pretty handy tool called _Windows Update_, that allows you to keep your system up to date with the latest available updates.

But what about all of your non-Microsoft software? Adobe applications? ZIP compression tools? Media players? Non-Microsoft web browsers and email clients, etc.? You have to update them all, one by one. And that takes time because each one of them has its own (automatic) update system.

Linux has a central place called the _package manager_, which takes care of everything installed on your system, but also every single piece of software your computer has. So if you want to keep everything up to date, all you have to do is press the _Install Updates_ button down there:

[Screenshot]

### Why copy software illegally if you can get it for free?

So you're perfectly clean, you've bought a license for all the software you've ever used, and nobody can bother you about it? Well, if that's the case, congratulations :)

But for many people, let's face it, illegally copied software is very common. That's why software manufacturers are evolving and finding more and more ways to track down illegal owners, and since more and more people tend to have broadband (permanent) connections, they may add an online telemetry feature to the software that checks and verifies your copy every time you launch it, or you may have to create an account and log in on all your devices.

If you run Linux and install free software, you'll never have to worry about this ever again! Most free (as in _free speech_) software is free (as in _free beer_). You can find a free alternative to most commercial software. They may lack some of the advanced features, but they'll be more than enough for most people. Here's a list of some commercial software, and their open source equivalents:

| Commercial                     | Open Source                          | Exists on Windows? |
|--------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------|
| Adobe Illustrator              | Inkscape                             | Yes                |
| Adobe InDesign                 | Scribus                              | Yes                |
| Adobe Photoshop                | The GIMP                             | Yes                |
| Adobe Premiere                 | Pitivi, Kino, Cinelerra              | No                 |
| Adobe Reader                   | Evince, Kpdf                         | Yes                |
| Apple iTunes                   | AmaroK, Rhythmbox, Banshee           | Yes                |
| Autodesk Autocad               | FreeCad                              | Yes                |
| Autodesk 3ds Max               | Blender                              | Yes                |
| Autodesk Maya                  | Blender                              | Yes                |
| Bittorrent                     | Transmission                         | Yes                |
| Microsoft Edge                 | Firefox, Chromium                    | Yes                |
| Microsoft Word                 | LibreOffice Writer                   | Yes                |
| Microsoft Excel                | LibreOffice Calc                     | Yes                |
| Microsoft Powerpoint           | LibreOffice Impress                  | Yes                |
| Microsoft Outlook              | Thunderbird, Evolution, KMail, Geary | Yes                |
| Microsoft Windows Media Player | Mplayer, VLC, Totem, Kaffeine, Xine  | Yes                |
| Nero                           | Brasero, K3b                         | No                 |

### Need new software? Don't bother searching the web, Linux gets it for you.

When you want to try a new piece of software in Windows, you'll need to:

* search the web to find software that meets your needs,
* find a website where you can download it,
* maybe pay for it,
* actually download the software,
* install it by clicking through a dialog and
* sometimes reboot your computer.

On Linux, things are much simpler. Linux has something called a _package manager_: every piece of software is contained in its own _package_. When you need some new software, you simply open the package manager, type in a few keywords, select the software you want to install and press _Apply_ or _Install_. Or you can just browse through existing software in categories.

[Screenshot]

So one: no more surfing. Two: no more downloading and installing software yourself. Three: more time to actually try out the software.

## The few cases where you should stick to Windows (for now)

## The way to get Linux on your PC step by step

Commit message:

Add article "Why is Windows getting slower by the day?"

docs/index.md, after:

## The many reasons for switching to Linux

### Don't pay $200 for your operating system.

You're probably saying to yourself: "Oh, I didn't pay for Windows". Are you absolutely sure? If your computer came with a copy of Windows, then you paid for it, even if the store didn't tell you. On average, the price of a Windows license is about a quarter of the price of a new computer. Where do you think Microsoft gets its money from?

Or, if you build your own PC and buy your individual hardware components, you will find that a new Windows 11 key costs about $140 for the Home Edition and $260 for the Pro version on the Microsoft website.

On the other hand, you can get Linux for free. That's right, all these guys all around the world have worked very hard to make a clean, secure, efficient, good-looking system, and they're giving their work away so that everyone can use it for free. Of course, some companies make a good business out of selling support, documentation, hotline, etc. for their own version of Linux, and that is certainly a good thing. But most of the time, you don't have to pay a cent.

### No more crapware

If you've ever bought a new computer running Windows, you must know that it can be a very frustrating experience.

It all starts the first time you turn it on: countless windows pop up asking you to subscribe to services, the premium version of an antivirus, games you never asked for, productivity applications that require you to create an online account, and so on.

But it doesn't stop there. Every time you start your computer, all these pre-installed programs start up in the background, and you have to wait longer and longer to see your desktop on the screen, and when you finally do so, it feels too slow to use because all these programs are running in the background.

To add insult to injury, often after you have owned your new computer for 30 days, new dialogs start popping up and you realize that some of the programs you thought were free (antivirus, for example) really aren't, all you have is a free 30-day trial.

The thing is, most computer manufacturers think this is a good thing. They install programs on your computer before you buy it, because they think it will improve your experience, because it will give you "more" for the same price, and because they think it will help differentiate them from competitors, who may not offer as many "improvements" over the standard system. For them, this is added value.

But for the user, it usually means more pain, more waiting, more uninstalling of unwanted programs, more money to pay if you decide you do need that not-so-free antivirus, and at the end of the day, a bloated and crippled computer. That's why these programs have been given a not-so-polite name: "crapware".

None of that with Linux. No program will nag you to subscribe, pay after a trial period is over, or just slow down your computer and make you wait some more while it boots up, just when you thought it was ready to use. Linux comes with everything that you need to start working right out of the box, but without the crapware.

### Freedom!

Linux and open source software in general is _free_. This means that its license is a _free license_, and the most common one is the _General Public License (GPL)_. This license says that anyone is allowed to copy the software, see the source code (the "recipe"), modify it, and redistribute it as long as it remains licensed under the GPL.

So what do you care about freedom? Imagine that Microsoft disappearing tomorrow (okay, that's not very likely, but what about in 5 years, 10 years?). Or imagine that they suddenly tripled the price of a Windows or Office license. If you're locked into Windows, there's nothing you can do. You (or your business) depend on this one company, on their software, and you can't possibly make things work without it (What good is a computer without an operating system?).

Isn't that a serious problem? You depend on a single company and trust them wholeheartedly to keep something as important as your computers running the way they should in these days. If Microsoft decides to move Windows to a paid subscription model, there's nothing you can do about it (except switch to Linux, of course). If Windows has a bug that really bothers you, and Microsoft won't fix it, there's nothing you can do about it. If a new version of Windows doesn't support your hardware anymore, there's nothing you can do about it.

With open source, when a particular project or sponsoring company dies, all the code remains open to the community and people can continue to improve it. If this project is particulary useful to you, you can even do this yourself. If a particular bug annoys you, you can report it, talk to the developers, but even better, you can fix it yourself (or hire someone to do so), and send the changes back to the upstream developers so that everyone gets the improvement as well. You're free to do (almost) anything you want with the software.

### When the system is installed, why would you _still_ need to install stuff?

Installing Windows is just the beginning. Imagine you have just installed your brand-new copy of Windows 11 and are getting ready to unleash your computer skills. Okay, let's check for new email. Oh, there's no serious email client preinstalled on Windows. You could buy Microsoft Office to get Outlook up and running, or you could install Thunderbird. Either way, you have to go online, find a website where you can download an .exe or .msi installer file, download it, and install it.

Whew, okay, now you're all set. A friend sent you an email with an attached .docx or .odt text document. Your Windows can't read that either, right now. You either have to buy your copy of Microsoft Office, or you just download LibreOffice, but you still have to find it, download it (hopefully you have a broadband connection), install it, etc.

Your friend also sent you an image, but it has a bad contrast, bad brightness, and needs a good crop. So you go out and buy a paid subscription of Photoshop, or download GIMP (that's the name of the free program that can do almost as much as Photoshop): search, download, install, and so on.

That's enough: you get the idea, Windows is far from complete, and installing it is just the beginning of trouble.

Your friend also sent you an image, but it has a bad contrast, bad brightness, and needs a good crop. So you go out and buy a paid subscription of Photoshop, or download GIMP (that's is the name of the free program that can do almost as much as Photoshop): search, download, install, and so on.

That's enough: you get the idea, Windows is far from complete, and installing it is just the beginning of trouble.

When you get Linux (such as Ubuntu, Fedora, etc., these are different "flavors" of Linux), you also get, without installing anything else:

* everything you need to write text documents, edit spreadsheets or make nice presentations
* a web browser (e.g., Firefox) and an email client (e.g., Thunderbird or Evolution)
* an image editor (GIMP) almost as powerful as Photoshop
* a movie player
* a music player and organizer
* a PDF reader
* everything you need to decompress archives (ZIP, etc.)
* etc.

You can just start working right away.

### Forget about drivers.

New pieces of hardware, even the simplest kind, usually comes with a CD or a download link that contains a very small piece of software called a "driver". If you read the instructions manual, you know that the hardware won't work on a Windows computer until you install the driver. If you're like most people and don't read the manual, then you'll probably figure it out on your own when you see that your new high-tech gizmo doesn't work out of the box.

If you bought the hardware a while ago, and you're reusing it on another computer, you'll probably want to get the latest version of the driver from the manufacturer's website. This can take quite a while, considering how, huh, let's say, oddly organized some manufacturers' websites are.

Okay, so that's just one piece of hardware. Now imagine that you want to install Windows on a whole new, untouched, computer. You'll have to wait for Windows Update or the Device Manager to detect your hardware, or actively click on it, or install third-party tools like Intel Driver Assistant or NVIDIA GeForce Experience, find the latest driver for each piece of hardware, install it, and reboot from time to time. And that is on top of an already lengthy Windows installation.

Linux doesn't need separate drivers. All the drivers are already included in the Linux kernel, the core of the system, and come with every single Linux installation. This means a very quick and self-contained installation process. Once you're done with installing Linux, you have everything you need to start working (including the software you'll be using, see "When the system has installed …" article on this website) and ready to use peripherals.

### Update all your software with a single click.

Windows has a pretty handy tool called _Windows Update_, that allows you to keep your system up to date with the latest available updates.

But what about all of your non-Microsoft software? Adobe applications? ZIP compression tools? Media players? Non-Microsoft web browsers and email clients, etc.? You have to update them all, one by one. And that takes time because each one of them has its own (automatic) update system.

Linux has a central place called the _package manager_, which takes care of everything installed on your system, but also every single piece of software your computer has. So if you want to keep everything up to date, all you have to do is press the _Install Updates_ button down there:

[Screenshot]

### Why copy software illegally if you can get it for free?

So you're perfectly clean, you've bought a license for all the software you've ever used, and nobody can bother you about it? Well, if that's the case, congratulations :)

But for many people, let's face it, illegally copied software is very common. That's why software manufacturers are evolving and finding more and more ways to track down illegal owners, and since more and more people tend to have broadband (permanent) connections, they may add an online telemetry feature to the software that checks and verifies your copy every time you launch it, or you may have to create an account and log in on all your devices.

If you run Linux and install free software, you'll never have to worry about this ever again! Most free (as in _free speech_) software is free (as in _free beer_). You can find a free alternative to most commercial software. They may lack some of the advanced features, but they'll be more than enough for most people. Here's a list of some commercial software, and their open source equivalents:

| Commercial                     | Open Source                          | Exists on Windows? |
|--------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------|
| Adobe Illustrator              | Inkscape                             | Yes                |
| Adobe InDesign                 | Scribus                              | Yes                |
| Adobe Photoshop                | The GIMP                             | Yes                |
| Adobe Premiere                 | Pitivi, Kino, Cinelerra              | No                 |
| Adobe Reader                   | Evince, Kpdf                         | Yes                |
| Apple iTunes                   | AmaroK, Rhythmbox, Banshee           | Yes                |
| Autodesk Autocad               | FreeCad                              | Yes                |
| Autodesk 3ds Max               | Blender                              | Yes                |
| Autodesk Maya                  | Blender                              | Yes                |
| Bittorrent                     | Transmission                         | Yes                |
| Microsoft Edge                 | Firefox, Chromium                    | Yes                |
| Microsoft Word                 | LibreOffice Writer                   | Yes                |
| Microsoft Excel                | LibreOffice Calc                     | Yes                |
| Microsoft Powerpoint           | LibreOffice Impress                  | Yes                |
| Microsoft Outlook              | Thunderbird, Evolution, KMail, Geary | Yes                |
| Microsoft Windows Media Player | Mplayer, VLC, Totem, Kaffeine, Xine  | Yes                |
| Nero                           | Brasero, K3b                         | No                 |

### Need new software? Don't bother searching the web, Linux gets it for you.

When you want to try a new piece of software in Windows, you'll need to:

* search the web to find software that meets your needs,
* find a website where you can download it,
* maybe pay for it,
* actually download the software,
* install it by clicking through a dialog and
* sometimes reboot your computer.

On Linux, things are much simpler. Linux has something called a _package manager_: every piece of software is contained in its own _package_. When you need some new software, you simply open the package manager, type in a few keywords, select the software you want to install and press _Apply_ or _Install_. Or you can just browse through existing software in categories.

[Screenshot]

So one: no more surfing. Two: no more downloading and installing software yourself. Three: more time to actually try out the software.

### Why is Windows getting slower by the day?

Windows has a number of design flaws that cause it to get slower and slower. You've probably heard someone say, "My computer's getting slower, I'm going to reinstall" more than once. Reinstalling Windows solves the problem … until next time.

You might think that's just the way computers work. Well, try Linux and you'll be surprised. Five years from now, your system will be just as fast and responsive as the day you installed it, not to mention you won't have any viruses, adware, trojans, worms, etc. that would force you to reinstall anyway.

I've convinced a lot of people to switch to Linux. Most of them are using mid-range computers that they've had for a couple of years but Linux hasn't let them down and is still running perfectly well and is still fast.

Linux allows you to spend more time working and less time reinstalling.

## The few cases where you should stick to Windows (for now)

## The way to get Linux on your PC step by step
